---
layout: post
title: The Value of Uncertainty in Research Degrees
gh-repo: matthewsillence/matthewsillence.github.io
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [postgraduate research, supervision, uncertainty]
comments: true
---
I am currently preparing the teaching materials for the MA in Higher Education Practice pilot module on postgraduate research supervision, that will begin this autumn at the University of East Anglia. In preparing the second session of the seminar series that forms the core of the module, I began by thinking about the nature of student transition from earlier degree programmes (Master's courses mostly, but sometimes from Bachelor's in the Sciences). I wanted to know what it was in the _[Quality Code for Higher Education](http://www.qaa.ac.uk//en/quality-code/the-existing-uk-quality-code/part-a-setting-and-maintaining-academic-standards#)_ in the UK that distinguished research degrees from, say, a Master's-level course.  
  
I had explored this issue over a year ago when I was preparing my own Master's dissertation as part of my professional development within the University, and one of the most significant differences was idea of 'originality' and the creation of new knowledge. A Master's candidate might be expected to demonstrate originality of application of knowledge, or in tackling a problem, but not necessarily developing a new investigative technique, for example.  
  
However, in re-reading the QAA statement, I also realised that research degrees seem to involve managing uncertainty, both in the incompleteness of data (which Master's candidates would also be expected to deal with), but also in making decisions in 'unpredictable situations' and coping with 'unforeseen problems'. Although not explicitly stated, flexibility, adaptability and resilience are implied in this model of research practice.  
  
With this in mind, when we consider developing supervisory competencies, we would do well to remind ourselves that uncertainty and the provisional are not unfortunate pitfalls of a doctoral journey, but rather part of the path that researchers tread. When scaffolding doctoral candidates' learning, identifying moments of uncertainty are crucial in enacting 'doctorateness' and building confidence and resilience.  
  
Researcher developers, supervisors, university managers and students themselves should take heart at uncertainty. The more we learn to accept it as a reality and still manage to move forward, step by step, the more likely an individual's learning journey will align with their doctoral journey. This might support, not only the timely completion of the degree programme, but also a sense of empowerment that has a more profound impact on an individual's experience of an advanced degree.
